---
AEP: 2
Title: ArmoniK APIs Definition Guidelines
Author: Jérôme Gurhem <jgurhem@aneo.fr>
Status: Draft
Type: Standard
Content-Type: text/markdown
Created: 2023-09-14
---


# Abstract

This AEP describes the guidelines that should be followed when updating ArmoniK APIs.
This mainly pertains to gRPC APIs that are defined in ArmoniK.API.

# Motivation

In order to create stable API, their development should have guidelines to make sure that they have expected qualities.

# Rationale

Current APIs are not following any guidelines and this led to API which are complicated, not uniform and does not follow any style guide such as [Google Style Guide](https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/style/).
This AEP provides guidelines and suggest tools that can be used to ensure that the guidelines are correctly implemented.

# Specification

## APIs should be easy and simple to use

One of the first principle in software development, the KISS principle, should be used to define these API. We want API to be as simple possible with the least complexity. This will diminish the difficulty to start using ArmoniK for other developper.

## APIs shloud have comments

Service, Messages, Enums and RPC methods should be commented so that documentation can be automatically generated.
These comments should also include noteworthy implementation details such as what is the intended behavior and the expected result.

## Use linter to validate proto files

A protobuf linter must be used to validate that the proto files are properly writen. We recommend  [Buf Linter](https://buf.build/docs/lint/overview).
The following configuration could be used.

```yaml
version: v1
lint:
  use:
    - DEFAULT
    - COMMENTS
```

It includes the following rules:

- Best practices suggest that request and response message for every RPC should be unique as changing one of these message impact every RPC that uses it.
It is recommended to have a wrapper message for RPC request and response types.
- Files should declare a package.
- Files should be in a directory according to their package name and files in the same directory should have the same package.
- Services and Messages should be named appropriately.
- Enums should have itself as prefix.
- Only leading comments are considered by Buf, so proto files should include leading comments for everything.

See [Buf Linter Rules](https://buf.build/docs/lint/rules) for an extensive description of each rule used.

## Avoid using `oneof`

gPRC `oneof` means that a value can be one of several messages.
It highly increase the complexity of using a message when they are used in streams and/or responses.

When used in streams, `oneof` messages are complicated to use since messages could need to be sent in a specific order.
The usage of this kind of method could be very difficult without appropriate documentation and state machines.

When used in responses, every case should be accounted for even for the nominal case.
It adds a lot of complexity especially in cases of errors included in `oneof` responses.
Clients have to manage every case with the possibility of most of the cases being impossible to recover from or being useless.

## Avoid using streams or provide unitary alternative

Some systems does not support streaming such as [gRPC web](https://github.com/grpc/grpc-web) (gRPC web does not support streaming from client to server).
Therefore we should avoid stream based RPC methods especially in the control plane.
Stream based methods can still be added if an alternative with unitary calls is also added.
They can be useful for some optimizations so they are not completely banned.

## Error handling

RPC methods should have an error message that will be sent as response metadata when an error happened during the call.
This aims to simplify response messages as much as possible for the nominal case.

```proto
// Exemple response when call is sucessful
message MyResponse {
    // The internal data that is sent client-side
    string my_string_data = 1;
}

// Exemple error that will be sent to client as response metadata included in the rpc error
// It may include oneofs when there are several possibilities
// This should be used in conjonction with gRPC status codes and exceptions
message MyError {
    // error that occured
    string error_details = 1;
}
```

## gRPC JSON transcoding

gRPC JSON transcoding is a capability that allows to use JSON REST-like APIs to interact with a service implemented in gRPC.
It is suggested to make it available for the control plane so that clients can use REST-like request to interact with ArmoniK as it will simplify the use of ArmoniK in environments where gRPC clients are not available or difficult to use.

# Backwards Compatibility

If breaking changes are introduced in new proposal, API version should be increased.

# Reference Implementation

<!-- @case-police-ignore Api -->
A reference implementation will come as a Pull Request in ArmoniK.Api repository and this will be a first draft of our APIs that follow these guidelines.

# Rejected Ideas

A few of the ideas that were rejected when designing our gRPC APIs.

## Implicit actions in services

Implicit creation of data and metadata in ArmoniK should be avoided.

> "Explicit is better than implicit" -- The Zen of Python

## Simpler filter system

Actual filters are quite complicated with several levels of `oneof` that we would rather avoid but the alternatives were not great either:

- Using a string containing the filter request means losing gRPC typing AND maintaining a completely new and custom query system.
We did not want either of them.

## `oneof` in response to manage errors

Errors should be managed with RPC error status code instead of messages dedicated to error management in a `oneof` in the response of the method.
It increases the complexity of handling the response.
It is really verbose and user should manage every case even the cases that they cannot recover from.
In the case of APIs misuse, an error is a simpler and clearer way to indicate that there is an issue.

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
